# time-zone-travel-hockey-performance
Introduction and Background: An issue often discussed about professional sports teams is the effects of extensive travel on performance, sleep, and recovery. For example, the Columbus Blue Jackets (CBJ) started as a Western Conference team, although their hometown, Columbus, OH, is in the Eastern time zone. As a Western Conference team, the CBJ traveled to the Pacific time zone, often playing games late at night, and having to return for next day games in the Eastern time zone. Could this type of travel impact player performance? If so, how can trainers and team management most effectively cope with this challenge? In 2013, the CBJ moved into the Eastern Conference and did not have to deal with the effects of time zone differences as much as the years prior.

Hypothesis and Plan: My basic hypothesis is: Travel from Eastern to Western time zones negatively impacts subsequent game performance of the Columbus Blue Jackets. To test this hypothesis, I will first break the data into games played by the CBJ before 2013 and from 2013 on. The “game” table of the dataset contains datetime and time zone information, and I will look for the outcomes of the games (using wins and losses from the “game_teams_stats” table of the data) played in the Eastern time zone 1-2 days after late day games in the Pacific time zone. I would expect to see more losses after PST travel the evening before an EST game. I may also be able to dissect performance further by investigating individual plays. More shots, goals and hits (also from “game_team_stats” table) could indicate more team energy and recovery from the previous game played.

Data: I chose to analyze the NHL Game Data Kaggle set located here: https://www.kaggle.com/martinellis/nhl-game-data. This dataset contains results from National Hockey League games and individual player statistics as well as information on specific plays, such as shots, goals and stoppages in play, thus it is quite a comprehensive collection. This dataset is interesting to me because professional sports teams have begun to use data over the last 10 years to inform training, nutrition, and sleep schedules for their players. I selected two particular tables from this dataset that contain the variables of interest to me. These tables are described below.

Methods: For this analysis I will create two DataFrames, one containing all records from before 2013 and one containing all records after. My plan is to interrogate the data where the CBJ is the away team in the Western conference versus when they are a home or away team in the Eastern conference, before and after 2013. I plan to look at the differences in games won, goals scored, hits, and shots.

First, I will check the distribution of my variables to ensure they are normally distributed. If they are, I can run ANOVA to see if there are any significant differences among the different groups. If there are, I can then check for pairwise relationships using Tukey's test. If the variables are not normally distributed, I have non-parametric tests that I can use to test for differences. My confidence interval will be set at 95%.

I initially intended to look for changes in performance of the CBJ in the Eastern time zone a period of 1-2 days after they had returned from a Western conference game. I learned this this plan may be difficult to implement, and I may do this analysis at a later time, as it is beyond my current coding skills.

Results: Based on a visual inspection, the variables of interest appeared normally distributed, but Shapiro-Wilk testing suggested otherwise, so I chose to run a non-parametric test as well as ANOVA. Both tests produced the same result: there was a significant difference between performance before and after 2013; i.e., based on a p-value of 0.05, I cannot reject the null that there is no significant difference in means.

To see if these differences were a result of the change in time zones, I ran pairwise t-tests (would have preferred to run Tukey's test but couldn't), and there were significant differences in performance indicators between the time zones both before and after 2013.

Discussion and Recommendation: Based on these results alone, I conclude that there were significant effects of travel to different time zones on two indicators of hockey performance (hits, shots) for the Columbus Blue Jackets and the Detroit Red Wings when comparing performance before 2013 and after 2013. However, this was only two teams. As a next step in the process, I would like to analyze time zone travel effects on performance of other Eastern conference NHL teams. It may also be useful to break the data into times when each Eastern team remains in EDT for at least a week to see if performance indicators improve during these instances. This could serve as a "Control" group. Importantly, I would like to be able to analyze specifically the effects on peformance indicators in Eastern time zone 1-2 days after return travel from the Western time zone. The current analysis was not granular enough to pick up these effects. Overall, it appeared that the teams analyzed recorded more shots and hits after the move to the Eastern conference in year 2013.

Although the results were significant, many factors could account for these differences. For example, perhaps changes in team rosters after 2013 for these two teams, such as acquisition of stronger shooters, could lead to more shots. Maybe changes in coaching focus or training led to more shot taking or hits. A deeper analysis of the data overall would need to be conducted. Again, it would be preferable to study all teams.

In terms of recovery and training, I would consider this analysis preliminary evidence that NHL coaches and management should pay attention to the effects of time zone travel on hockey performance. Teams might consider nutritional and physical recovery measures (massage, ice baths, physical therapy, etc.) to maximize training and counteract any issues encountered by extensive travel. Perhaps additional data to include surveys about subjective measures of sleep quality, well-being, pain, etc. could add more insight and provide a complete picture of training status and recovery for each team.

